MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY
--------------------------------
[From the English edition of 1888, edited by Friedrich
Engels]

   A spectre is haunting Europe -- the spectre of
Communism.  All the Powers of old Europe have entered
into a holy alliance to exorcise this spectre: Pope and
Czar, Metternich and Guizot, French Radicals and German
police-spies.

Where is the party in opposition that has not been
decried as Communistic by its opponents in power?
Where the Opposition that has not hurled back the
branding reproach of Communism, against the more
advanced opposition parties, as well as against its
reactionary adversaries?

Two things result from this fact.

I.  Communism is already acknowledged by all European
Powers to be itself a Power.

II.  It is high time that Communists should openly, in
the face of the whole world, publish their views, their
aims, their tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of
the Spectre of Communism with a Manifesto of the party
itself.

To this end, Communists of various nationalities have
assembled in London, and sketched the following
Manifesto, to be published in the English, French,
German, Italian, Flemish and Danish languages.


I.  BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIANS

The history of all hitherto existing societies is the
history of class struggles.

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and
serf, guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor
and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one
another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now
open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a
revolutionary re-constitution of society at large, or
in the common ruin of the contending classes.

In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost
everywhere a complicated arrangement of society into
various orders, a manifold gradation of social rank.
In ancient Rome we have patricians, knights, plebeians,
slaves; in the Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals,
guild-masters, journeymen, apprentices, serfs; in
almost all of these classes, again, subordinate
gradations.

The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the
ruins of feudal society has not done away with clash
antagonisms.  It has but established new classes, new
conditions of oppression, new forms of struggle in
place of the old ones.  Our epoch, the epoch of the
bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive
feature: it has simplified the class antagonisms:
Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into
two great hostile camps, into two great classes,
directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and
Proletariat.

From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered
burghers of the earliest towns.  From these burgesses
the first elements of the bourgeoisie were developed.

The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape,
opened up fresh ground for the rising bourgeoisie.  The
East-Indian and Chinese markets, the colonisation of
America, trade with the colonies, the increase in the
means of exchange and in commodities generally, gave to
commerce, to navigation, to industry, an impulse never
before known, and thereby, to the revolutionary element
in the tottering feudal society, a rapid development.

The feudal system of industry, under which industrial
production was monopolised by closed guilds, now no
longer sufficed for the growing wants of the new
markets.  The manufacturing system took its place.  The
guild-masters were pushed on one side by the
manufacturing middle class; division of labour between
the different corporate guilds vanished in the face of
division of labour in each single workshop.

Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever
rising.  Even manufacture no longer sufficed.
Thereupon, steam and machinery revolutionised
industrial production.  The place of manufacture was
taken by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of the
industrial middle class, by industrial millionaires,
the leaders of whole industrial armies, the modern
bourgeois.

Modern industry has established the world-market, for
which the discovery of America paved the way.  This
market has given an immense development to commerce, to
navigation, to communication by land.  This development
has, in its time, reacted on the extension of industry;
and in proportion as industry, commerce, navigation,
railways extended, in the same proportion the
bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital, and
pushed into the background every class handed down from
the Middle Ages.

We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself
the product of a long course of development, of a
series of revolutions in the modes of production and of
exchange.

Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was
accompanied by a corresponding political advance of
that class.  An oppressed class under the sway of the
feudal nobility, an armed and self-governing
association in the mediaeval commune; here independent
urban republic (as in Italy and Germany), there taxable
"third estate" of the monarchy (as in France),
afterwards, in the period of manufacture proper,
serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy
as a counterpoise against the nobility, and, in fact,
corner-stone of the great monarchies in general, the
bourgeoisie has at last, since the establishment of
Modern Industry and of the world-market, conquered for
itself, in the modern representative State, exclusive
political sway.  The executive of the modern State is
but a committee for managing the common affairs of the
whole bourgeoisie.

The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most
revolutionary part.

The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand,
has put an end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic
relations.  It has pitilessly torn asunder the motley
feudal ties that bound man to his "natural superiors,"
and has left remaining no other nexus between man and
man than naked self-interest, than callous "cash
payment."  It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies
of religious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of
philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water of
egotistical calculation.  It has resolved personal
worth into exchange value.  And in place of the
numberless and feasible chartered freedoms, has set up
that single, unconscionable freedom -- Free Trade.  In
one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and
political illusions, naked, shameless, direct, brutal
exploitation.

The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every
occupation hitherto honoured and looked up to with
reverent awe.  It has converted the physician, the
lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into
its paid wage labourers.

The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its
sentimental veil, and has reduced the family relation
to a mere money relation.

The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that
the brutal display of vigour in the Middle Ages, which
Reactionists so much admire, found its fitting
complement in the most slothful indolence.  It has been
the first to show what man's activity can bring about.
It has accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian
pyramids, Roman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it
has conducted expeditions that put in the shade all
former Exoduses of nations and crusades.

The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly
revolutionising the instruments of production, and
thereby the relations of production, and with them the
whole relations of society.  Conservation of the old
modes of production in unaltered form, was, on the
contrary, the first condition of existence for all
earlier industrial classes.  Constant revolutionising
of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social
conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation
distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones.
All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of
ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are
swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated
before they can ossify.  All that is solid melts into
air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last
compelled to face with sober senses, his real
conditions of life, and his relations with his kind.

The need of a constantly expanding market for its
products chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface
of the globe.  It must nestle everywhere, settle
everywhere, establish connexions everywhere.

The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the
world-market given a cosmopolitan character to
production and consumption in every country.  To the
great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn from under
the feet of industry the national ground on which it
stood.  All old-established national industries have
been destroyed or are daily being destroyed.  They are
dislodged by new industries, whose introduction becomes
a life and death question for all civilised nations, by
industries that no longer work up indigenous raw
material, but raw material drawn from the remotest
zones; industries whose products are consumed, not only
at home, but in every quarter of the globe.  In place
of the old wants, satisfied by the productions of the
country, we find new wants, requiring for their
satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes.
In place of the old local and national seclusion and
self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every
direction, universal inter-dependence of nations.  And
as in material, so also in intellectual production.
The intellectual creations of individual nations become
common property.  National one-sidedness and
narrow-mindedness become more and more impossible, and
from the numerous national and local literatures, there
arises a world literature.

The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all
instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated
means of communication, draws all, even the most
barbarian, nations into civilisation.  The cheap prices
of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which
it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces
the barbarians' intensely obstinate hatred of
foreigners to capitulate.  It compels all nations, on
pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of
production; it compels them to introduce what it calls
civilisation into their midst, i.e., to become
bourgeois themselves.  In one word, it creates a world
after its own image.

The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule
of the towns.  It has created enormous cities, has
greatly increased the urban population as compared with
the rural, and has thus rescued a considerable part of
the population from the idiocy of rural life.  Just as
it has made the country dependent on the towns, so it
has made barbarian and semi-barbarian countries
dependent on the civilised ones, nations of peasants on
nations of bourgeois, the East on the West.

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the
scattered state of the population, of the means of
production, and of property.  It has agglomerated
production, and has concentrated property in a few
hands.  The necessary consequence of this was political
centralisation.  Independent, or but loosely connected
provinces, with separate interests, laws, governments
and systems of taxation, became lumped together into
one nation, with one government, one code of laws, one
national class-interest, one frontier and one
customs-tariff.  The bourgeoisie, during its rule of
scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and
more colossal productive forces than have all preceding
generations together.  Subjection of Nature's forces to
man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry
and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric
telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for
cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations
conjured out of the ground -- what earlier century had
even a presentiment that such productive forces
slumbered in the lap of social labour?

We see then: the means of production and of exchange,
on whose foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up,
were generated in feudal society.  At a certain stage
in the development of these means of production and of
exchange, the conditions under which feudal society
produced and exchanged, the feudal organisation of
agriculture and manufacturing industry, in one word,
the feudal relations of property became no longer
compatible with the already developed productive
forces; they became so many fetters.  They had to be
burst asunder; they were burst asunder.

Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied
by a social and political constitution adapted to it,
and by the economical and political sway of the
bourgeois class.

A similar movement is going on before our own eyes.
Modern bourgeois society with its relations of
production, of exchange and of property, a society that
has conjured up such gigantic means of production and
of exchange, is like the sorcerer, who is no longer
able to control the powers of the nether world whom he
has called up by his spells.  For many a decade past
the history of industry and commerce is but the history
of the revolt of modern productive forces against
modern conditions of production, against the property
relations that are the conditions for the existence of
the bourgeoisie and of its rule.  It is enough to
mention the commercial crises that by their periodical
return put on its trial, each time more threateningly,
the existence of the entire bourgeois society.  In
these crises a great part not only of the existing
products, but also of the previously created productive
forces, are periodically destroyed.  In these crises
there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier
epochs, would have seemed an absurdity -- the epidemic
of over-production.  Society suddenly finds itself put
back into a state of momentary barbarism; it appears as
if a famine, a universal war of devastation had cut off
the supply of every means of subsistence; industry and
commerce seem to be destroyed; and why?  Because there
is too much civilisation, too much means of
subsistence, too much industry, too much commerce.  The
productive forces at the disposal of society no longer
tend to further the development of the conditions of
bourgeois property; on the contrary, they have become
too powerful for these conditions, by which they are
fettered, and so soon as they overcome these fetters,
they bring disorder into the whole of bourgeois
society, endanger the existence of bourgeois property.
The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to
comprise the wealth created by them.  And how does the
bourgeoisie get over these crises?  On the one hand
inforced destruction of a mass of productive forces; on
the other, by the conquest of new markets, and by the
more thorough exploitation of the old ones.  That is to
say, by paving the way for more extensive and more
destructive crises, and by diminishing the means
whereby crises are prevented.

The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism
to the ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie
itself.

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons
that bring death to itself; it has also called into
existence the men who are to wield those weapons -- the
modern working class -- the proletarians.

In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is
developed, in the same proportion is the proletariat,
the modern working class, developed -- a class of
labourers, who live only so long as they find work, and
who find work only so long as their labour increases
capital.  These labourers, who must sell themselves
piece-meal, are a commodity, like every other article
of commerce, and are consequently exposed to all the
vicissitudes of competition, to all the fluctuations of
the market.

Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to division
of labour, the work of the proletarians has lost all
individual character, and consequently, all charm for
the workman.  He becomes an appendage of the machine,
and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, and
most easily acquired knack, that is required of him.
Hence, the cost of production of a workman is
restricted, almost entirely, to the means of
subsistence that he requires for his maintenance, and
for the propagation of his race.  But the price of a
commodity, and therefore also of labour, is equal to
its cost of production.  In proportion therefore, as
the repulsiveness of the work increases, the wage
decreases.  Nay more, in proportion as the use of
machinery and division of labour increases, in the same
proportion the burden of toil also increases, whether
by prolongation of the working hours, by increase of
the work exacted in a given time or by increased speed
of the machinery, etc.

Modern industry has converted the little workshop of
the patriarchal master into the great factory of the
industrial capitalist.  Masses of labourers, crowded
into the factory, are organised like soldiers.  As
privates of the industrial army they are placed under
the command of a perfect hierarchy of officers and
sergeants.  Not only are they slaves of the bourgeois
class, and of the bourgeois State; they are daily and
hourly enslaved by the machine, by the over-looker,
and, above all, by the individual bourgeois
manufacturer himself.  The more openly this despotism
proclaims gain to be its end and aim, the more petty,
the more hateful and the more embittering it is.

The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in
manual labour, in other words, the more modern industry
becomes developed, the more is the labour of men
superseded by that of women.  Differences of age and
sex have no longer any distinctive social validity for
the working class.  All are instruments of labour, more
or less expensive to use, according to their age and
sex.

No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the
manufacturer, so far, at an end, that he receives his
wages in cash, than he is set upon by the other
portions of the bourgeoisie, the landlord, the
shopkeeper, the pawnbroker, etc.

The lower strata of the middle class -- the small
tradespeople, shopkeepers, retired tradesmen generally,
the handicraftsmen and peasants -- all these sink
gradually into the proletariat, partly because their
diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on
which Modern Industry is carried on, and is swamped in
the competition with the large capitalists, partly
because their specialized skill is rendered worthless
by the new methods of production.  Thus the proletariat
is recruited from all classes of the population.

The proletariat goes through various stages of
development.  With its birth begins its struggle with
the bourgeoisie.  At first the contest is carried on by
individual labourers, then by the workpeople of a
factory, then by the operatives of one trade, in one
locality, against the individual bourgeois who directly
exploits them.  They direct their attacks not against
the bourgeois conditions of production, but against the
instruments of production themselves; they destroy
imported wares that compete with their labour, they
smash to pieces machinery, they set factories ablaze,
they seek to restore by force the vanished status of
the workman of the Middle Ages.

At this stage the labourers still form an incoherent
mass scattered over the whole country, and broken up by
their mutual competition.  If anywhere they unite to
form more compact bodies, this is not yet the
consequence of their own active union, but of the union
of the bourgeoisie, which class, in order to attain its
own political ends, is compelled to set the whole
proletariat in motion, and is moreover yet, for a time,
able to do so.  At this stage, therefore, the
proletarians do not fight their enemies, but the
enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute
monarchy, the landowners, the non-industrial bourgeois,
the petty bourgeoisie.  Thus the whole historical
movement is concentrated in the hands of the
bourgeoisie; every victory so obtained is a victory for
the bourgeoisie.

But with the development of industry the proletariat
not only increases in number; it becomes concentrated
in greater masses, its strength grows, and it feels
that strength more.  The various interests and
conditions of life within the ranks of the proletariat
are more and more equalised, in proportion as machinery
obliterates all distinctions of labour, and nearly
everywhere reduces wages to the same low level.  The
growing competition among the bourgeois, and the
resulting commercial crises, make the wages of the
workers ever more fluctuating.  The unceasing
improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing,
makes their livelihood more and more precarious; the
collisions between individual workmen and individual
bourgeois take more and more the character of
collisions between two classes.  Thereupon the workers
begin to form combinations (Trades Unions) against the
bourgeois; they club together in order to keep up the
rate of wages; they found permanent associations in
order to make provision beforehand for these occasional
revolts.  Here and there the contest breaks out into
riots.

Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a
time.  The real fruit of their battles lies, not in the
immediate result, but in the ever-expanding union of
the workers.  This union is helped on by the improved
means of communication that are created by modern
industry and that place the workers of different
localities in contact with one another.  It was just
this contact that was needed to centralise the numerous
local struggles, all of the same character, into one
national struggle between classes.  But every class
struggle is a political struggle.  And that union, to
attain which the burghers of the Middle Ages, with
their miserable highways, required centuries, the
modern proletarians, thanks to railways, achieve in a
few years.

This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and
consequently into a political party, is continually
being upset again by the competition between the
workers themselves.  But it ever rises up again,
stronger, firmer, mightier.  It compels legislative
recognition of particular interests of the workers, by
taking advantage of the divisions among the bourgeoisie
itself.  Thus the ten-hours' bill in England was
carried.

Altogether collisions between the classes of the old
society further, in many ways, the course of
development of the proletariat.  The bourgeoisie finds
itself involved in a constant battle.  At first with
the aristocracy; later on, with those portions of the
bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have become
antagonistic to the progress of industry; at all times,
with the bourgeoisie of foreign countries.  In all
these battles it sees itself compelled to appeal to the
proletariat, to ask for its help, and thus, to drag it
into the political arena.  The bourgeoisie itself,
therefore, supplies the proletariat with its own
instruments of political and general education, in
other words, it furnishes the proletariat with weapons
for fighting the bourgeoisie.

Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of
the ruling classes are, by the advance of industry,
precipitated into the proletariat, or are at least
threatened in their conditions of existence.  These
also supply the proletariat with fresh elements of
enlightenment and progress.

Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the
decisive hour, the process of dissolution going on
within the ruling class, in fact within the whole range
of society, assumes such a violent, glaring character,
that a small section of the ruling class cuts itself
adrift, and joins the revolutionary class, the class
that holds the future in its hands.  Just as,
therefore, at an earlier period, a section of the
nobility went over to the bourgeoisie, so now a portion
of the bourgeoisie goes over to the proletariat, and in
particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideologists, who
have raised themselves to the level of comprehending
theoretically the historical movement as a whole.

Of all the classes that stand face to face with the
bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone is a really
revolutionary class.  The other classes decay and
finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the
proletariat is its special and essential product.  The
lower middle class, the small manufacturer, the
shopkeeper, the artisan, the peasant, all these fight
against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their
existence as fractions of the middle class.  They are
therefore not revolutionary, but conservative.  Nay
more, they are reactionary, for they try to roll back
the wheel of history.  If by chance they are
revolutionary, they are so only in view of their
impending transfer into the proletariat, they thus
defend not their present, but their future interests,
they desert their own standpoint to place themselves at
that of the proletariat.

The "dangerous class," the social scum, that passively
rotting mass thrown off by the lowest layers of old
society, may, here and there, be swept into the
movement by a proletarian revolution; its conditions of
life, however, prepare it far more for the part of a
bribed tool of reactionary intrigue.

In the conditions of the proletariat, those of old
society at large are already virtually swamped.  The
proletarian is without property; his relation to his
wife and children has no longer anything in common with
the bourgeois family-relations; modern industrial
labour, modern subjection to capital, the same in
England as in France, in America as in Germany, has
stripped him of every trace of national character.
Law, morality, religion, are to him so many bourgeois
prejudices, behind which lurk in ambush just as many
bourgeois interests.

All the preceding classes that got the upper hand,
sought to fortify their already acquired status by
subjecting society at large to their conditions of
appropriation.  The proletarians cannot become masters
of the productive forces of society, except by
abolishing their own previous mode of appropriation,
and thereby also every other previous mode of
appropriation.  They have nothing of their own to
secure and to fortify; their mission is to destroy all
previous securities for, and insurances of, individual
property.

All previous historical movements were movements of
minorities, or in the interests of minorities.  The
proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent
movement of the immense majority, in the interests of
the immense majority.  The proletariat, the lowest
stratum of our present society, cannot stir, cannot
raise itself up, without the whole superincumbent
strata of official society being sprung into the air.

Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of
the proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at first a
national struggle.  The proletariat of each country
must, of course, first of all settle matters with its
own bourgeoisie.

In depicting the most general phases of the development
of the proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled
civil war, raging within existing society, up to the
point where that war breaks out into open revolution,
and where the violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays
the foundation for the sway of the proletariat.

Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we
have already seen, on the antagonism of oppressing and
oppressed classes.  But in order to oppress a class,
certain conditions must be assured to it under which it
can, at least, continue its slavish existence.  The
serf, in the period of serfdom, raised himself to
membership in the commune, just as the petty bourgeois,
under the yoke of feudal absolutism, managed to develop
into a bourgeois.  The modern laborer, on the contrary,
instead of rising with the progress of industry, sinks
deeper and deeper below the conditions of existence of
his own class.  He becomes a pauper, and pauperism
develops more rapidly than population and wealth.  And
here it becomes evident, that the bourgeoisie is unfit
any longer to be the ruling class in society, and to
impose its conditions of existence upon society as an
over-riding law.  It is unfit to rule because it is
incompetent to assure an existence to its slave within
his slavery, because it cannot help letting him sink
into such a state, that it has to feed him, instead of
being fed by him.  Society can no longer live under
this bourgeoisie, in other words, its existence is no
longer compatible with society.

The essential condition for the existence, and for the
sway of the bourgeois class, is the formation and
augmentation of capital; the condition for capital is
wage-labour.  Wage-labour rests exclusively on
competition between the laborers.  The advance of
industry, whose involuntary promoter is the
bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers,
due to competition, by their revolutionary combination,
due to association.  The development of Modern
Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet the very
foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and
appropriates products.  What the bourgeoisie,
therefore, produces, above all, is its own
grave-diggers.  Its fall and the victory of the
proletariat are equally inevitable.


II.  PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISTS

In what relation do the Communists stand to the
proletarians as a whole?

The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to
other working-class parties.

They have no interests separate and apart from those of
the proletariat as a whole.

They do not set up any sectarian principles of their
own, by which to shape and mould the proletarian
movement.

The Communists are distinguished from the other
working-class parties is only: (1) In the national
struggles of the proletarians of the different
countries, they point out and bring to the front the
common interests of entire proletariat, independently
of nationality.  (2) In the various stages of
development which the struggle of the working class
against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they
always and everywhere represent the interests of the
movement as a whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand,
practically, the most advanced and resolute section of
the working-class parties of every country, that
section which pushes forward all others; on the other
hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of
the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding
the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate
general results of the proletarian movement.

The immediate aim of the Communist is the same as that
of all the other proletarian parties: formation of the
proletariat into a class, overthrow of the bourgeois
supremacy, conquest of political power by the
proletariat.

The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no
way based on ideas or principles that have been
invented, or discovered, by this or that would-be
universal reformer.  They merely express, in general
terms, actual relations springing from an existing
class struggle, from a historical movement going on
under our very eyes.  The abolition of existing
property relations is not at all a distinctive feature
of Communism.

All property relations in the past have continually
been subject to historical change consequent upon the
change in historical conditions.

The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal
property in favour of bourgeois property.

The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the
abolition of property generally, but the abolition of
bourgeois property. But modern bourgeois private
property is the final and most complete expression of
the system of producing and appropriating products,
that is based on class antagonisms, on the exploitation
of the many by the few.

In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be
summed up in the single sentence: Abolition of private
property.

We Communists have been reproached with the desire of
abolishing the right of personally acquiring property
as the fruit of a man's own labour, which property is
alleged to be the groundwork of all personal freedom,
activity and independence.

Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property!  Do you
mean the property of the petty artisan and of the small
peasant, a form of property that preceded the bourgeois
form?  There is no need to abolish that; the
development of industry has to a great extent already
destroyed it, and is still destroying it daily.

Or do you mean modern bourgeois private property?

But does wage-labour create any property for the
labourer?  Not a bit.  It creates capital, i.e., that
kind of property which exploits wage-labour, and which
cannot increase except upon condition of begetting a
new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploitation.
Property, in its present form, is based on the
antagonism of capital and wage-labour.  Let us examine
both sides of this antagonism.

To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely
personal, but a social status in production.  Capital
is a collective product, and only by the united action
of many members, nay, in the last resort, only by the
united action of all members of society, can it be set
in motion.

Capital is, therefore, not a personal, it is a social
power.

When, therefore, capital is converted into common
property, into the property of all members of society,
personal property is not thereby transformed into
social property.  It is only the social character of
the property that is changed.  It loses its
class-character.

Let us now take wage-labour.

The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage,
i.e., that quantum of the means of subsistence, which
is absolutely requisite in bare existence as a
labourer.  What, therefore, the wage-labourer
appropriates by means of his labour, merely suffices to
prolong and reproduce a bare existence.  We by no means
intend to abolish this personal appropriation of the
products of labour, an appropriation that is made for
the maintenance and reproduction of human life, and
that leaves no surplus wherewith to command the labour
of others.  All that we want to do away with, is the
miserable character of this appropriation, under which
the labourer lives merely to increase capital, and is
allowed to live only in so far as the interest of the
ruling class requires it.

In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to
increase accumulated labour.  In Communist society,
accumulated labour is but a means to widen, to enrich,
to promote the existence of the labourer.

In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the
present; in Communist society, the present dominates
the past.  In bourgeois society capital is independent
and has individuality, while the living person is
dependent and has no individuality.

And the abolition of this state of things is called by
the bourgeois, abolition of individuality and freedom!
And rightly so.  The abolition of bourgeois
individuality, bourgeois independence, and bourgeois
freedom is undoubtedly aimed at.

By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois
conditions of production, free trade, free selling and
buying.  But if selling and buying disappears, free
selling and buying disappears also.  This talk about
free selling and buying, and all the other "brave
words" of our bourgeoisie about freedom in general,
have a meaning, if any, only in contrast with
restricted selling and buying, with the fettered
traders of the Middle Ages, but have no meaning when
opposed to the Communistic abolition of buying and
selling, of the bourgeois conditions of production, and
of the bourgeoisie itself.

You are horrified at our intending to do away with
private property.  But in your existing society,
private property is already done away with for
nine-tenths of the population; its existence for the
few is solely due to its non-existence in the hands of
those nine-tenths.  You reproach us, therefore, with
intending to do away with a form of property, the
necessary condition for whose existence is the
non-existence of any property for the immense majority
of society.

In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away
with your property.  Precisely so; that is just what we
intend.

From the moment when labour can no longer be converted
into capital, money, or rent, into a social power
capable of being monopolised, i.e., from the moment
when individual property can no longer be transformed
into bourgeois property, into capital, from that
moment, you say individuality vanishes.

You must, therefore, confess that by "individual" you
mean no other person than the bourgeois, than the
middle-class owner of property.  This person must,
indeed, be swept out of the way, and made impossible.

Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate
the products of society; all that it does is to deprive
him of the power to subjugate the labour of others by
means of such appropriation.

It has been objected that upon the abolition of private
property all work will cease, and universal laziness
will overtake us.

According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to
have gone to the dogs through sheer idleness; for those
of its members who work, acquire nothing, and those who
acquire anything, do not work.  The whole of this
objection is but another expression of the tautology:
that there can no longer be any wage-labour when there
is no longer any capital.

All objections urged against the Communistic mode of
producing and appropriating material products, have, in
the same way, been urged against the Communistic modes
of producing and appropriating intellectual products.
Just as, to the bourgeois, the disappearance of class
property is the disappearance of production itself, so
the disappearance of class culture is to him identical
with the disappearance of all culture.

That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the
enormous majority, a mere training to act as a machine.

But don't wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our
intended abolition of bourgeois property, the standard
of your bourgeois notions of freedom, culture, law,
etc.  Your very ideas are but the outgrowth of the
conditions of your bourgeois production and bourgeois
property, just as your jurisprudence is but the will of
your class made into a law for all, a will, whose
essential character and direction are determined by the
economical conditions of existence of your class.

The selfish misconception that induces you to transform
into eternal laws of nature and of reason, the social
forms springing from your present mode of production
and form of property-historical relations that rise and
disappear in the progress of production -- this
misconception you share with every ruling class that
has preceded you.  What you see clearly in the case of
ancient property, what you admit in the case of feudal
property, you are of course forbidden to admit in the
case of your own bourgeois form of property.

Abolition of the family!  Even the most radical flare
up at this infamous proposal of the Communists.

On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois
family, based?  On capital, on private gain.  In its
completely developed form this family exists only among
the bourgeoisie.  But this state of things finds its
complement in the practical absence of the family among
the proletarians, and in public prostitution.

The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course
when its complement vanishes, and both will vanish with
the vanishing of capital.

Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation
of children by their parents?  To this crime we plead
guilty.

But, you will say, we destroy the most hallowed of
relations, when we replace home education by social.

And your education!  Is not that also social, and
determined by the social conditions under which you
educate, by the intervention, direct or indirect, of
society, by means of schools, etc.?  The Communists
have not invented the intervention of society in
education; they do but seek to alter the character of
that intervention, and to rescue education from the
influence of the ruling class.

The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education,
about the hallowed co-relation of parent and child,
becomes all the more disgusting, the more, by the
action of Modern Industry, all family ties among the
proletarians are torn asunder, and their children
transformed into simple articles of commerce and
instruments of labour.

But you Communists would introduce community of women,
screams the whole bourgeoisie in chorus.

The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of
production.  He hears that the instruments of
production are to be exploited in common, and,
naturally, can come to no other conclusion than that
the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to
the women.

He has not even a suspicion that the real point is to
do away with the status of women as mere instruments of
production.

For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the
virtuous indignation of our bourgeois at the community
of women which, they pretend, is to be openly and
officially established by the Communists.  The
Communists have no need to introduce community of
women; it has existed almost from time immemorial.

Our bourgeois, not content with having the wives and
daughters of their proletarians at their disposal, not
to speak of common prostitutes, take the greatest
pleasure in seducing each other's wives.

Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system of wives in
common and thus, at the most, what the Communists might
possibly be reproached with, is that they desire to
introduce, in substitution for a hypocritically
concealed, an openly legalised community of women.  For
the rest, it is self-evident that the abolition of the
present system of production must bring with it the
abolition of the community of women springing from that
system, i.e., of prostitution both public and private.

The Communists are further reproached with desiring to
abolish countries and nationality.

The working men have no country.  We cannot take from
them what they have not got.  Since the proletariat
must first of all acquire political supremacy, must
rise to be the leading class of the nation, must
constitute itself the nation, it is, so far, itself
national, though not in the bourgeois sense of the
word.

National differences and antagonisms between peoples
are daily more and more vanishing, owing to the
development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce,
to the world-market, to uniformity in the mode of
production and in the conditions of life corresponding
thereto.

The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to
vanish still faster.  United action, of the leading
civilised countries at least, is one of the first
conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat.

In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by
another is put an end to, the exploitation of one
nation by another will also be put an end to.  In
proportion as the antagonism between classes within the
nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation to another
will come to an end.

The charges against Communism made from a religious, a
philosophical, and, generally, from an ideological
standpoint, are not deserving of serious examination.

Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's
ideas, views and conceptions, in one word, man's
consciousness, changes with every change in the
conditions of his material existence, in his social
relations and in his social life?

What else does the history of ideas prove, than that
intellectual production changes its character in
proportion as material production is changed?  The
ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of
its ruling class.

When people speak of ideas that revolutionise society,
they do but express the fact, that within the old
society, the elements of a new one have been created,
and that the dissolution of the old ideas keeps even
pace with the dissolution of the old conditions of
existence.

When the ancient world was in its last throes, the
ancient religions were overcome by Christianity.  When
Christian ideas succumbed in the 18th century to
rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death
battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie.  The
ideas of religious liberty and freedom of conscience
merely gave expression to the sway of free competition
within the domain of knowledge.

"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious, moral,
philosophical and juridical ideas have been modified in
the course of historical development.  But religion,
morality philosophy, political science, and law,
constantly survived this change."

"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom,
Justice, etc. that are common to all states of society.
But Communism abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes
all religion, and all morality, instead of constituting
them on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradiction
to all past historical experience."

What does this accusation reduce itself to?  The
history of all past society has consisted in the
development of class antagonisms, antagonisms that
assumed different forms at different epochs.

But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is
common to all past ages, viz., the exploitation of one
part of society by the other.  No wonder, then, that
the social consciousness of past ages, despite all the
multiplicity and variety it displays, moves within
certain common forms, or general ideas, which cannot
completely vanish except with the total disappearance
of class antagonisms.

The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture
with traditional property relations; no wonder that its
development involves the most radical rupture with
traditional ideas.

But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to
Communism.

We have seen above, that the first step in the
revolution by the working class, is to raise the
proletariat to the position of ruling as to win the
battle of democracy.

The proletariat will use its political supremacy top
wrest, by degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to
centralise all instruments of production in the hands
of the State, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the
ruling class; and to increase the total of productive
forces as rapidly as possible.

Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected
except by means of despotic inroads on the rights of
property, and on the conditions of bourgeois
production; by means of measures, therefore, which
appear economically insufficient and untenable, but
which, in the course of the movement, outstrip
themselves, necessitate further inroads upon the old
social order, and are unavoidable as a means of
entirely revolutionising the mode of production.

These measures will of course be different in different
countries.

Nevertheless in the most advanced countries, the
following will be pretty generally applicable.

1.  Abolition of property in land and application of
all rents
    of land to public purposes.

2.  A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.

3.  Abolition of all right of inheritance.

4.  Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and
rebels.

5.  Centralisation of credit in the hands of the State,
by means
    of a national bank with State capital and an
exclusive monopoly.

6.  Centralisation of the means of communication and
transport
    in the hands of the State.

7.  Extension of factories and instruments of
production owned by the
    State; the bringing into cultivation of
waste-lands, and the
    improvement of the soil generally in accordance
with a common
    plan.

8.  Equal liability of all to labour.  Establishment of
    industrial armies, especially for agriculture.

9.  Combination of agriculture with manufacturing
industries; gradual
    abolition of the distinction between town and
country, by a more
    equable distribution of the population over the
country.

10.  Free education for all children in public schools.
Abolition of
     children's factory labour in its present form.
Combination of
     education with industrial production, &c., &c.

When, in the course of development, class distinctions
have disappeared, and all production has been
concentrated in the hands of a vast association of the
whole nation, the public power will lose its political
character.  Political power, properly so called, is
merely the organised power of one class for oppressing
another.  If the proletariat during its contest with
the bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of
circumstances, to organise itself as a class, if, by
means of a revolution, it makes itself the ruling
class, and, as such, sweeps away by force the old
conditions of production, then it will, along with
these conditions, have swept away the conditions for
the existence of class antagonisms and of classes
generally, and will thereby have abolished its own
supremacy as a class.

In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes
and class antagonisms, we shall have an association, in
which the free development of each is the condition for
the free development of all.


III SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERATURE


1. REACTIONARY SOCIALISM


A. Feudal Socialism


Owing to their historical position, it became the
vocation of the aristocracies of France and England to
write pamphlets against modern bourgeois society.  In
the French revolution of July 1830, and in the English
reform agitation, these aristocracies again succumbed
to the hateful upstart.  Thenceforth, a serious
political contest was altogether out of the question.
A literary battle alone remained possible.  But even in
the domain of literature the old cries of the
restoration period had become impossible.

In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy were
obliged to lose sight, apparently, of their own
interests, and to formulate their indictment against
the bourgeoisie in the interest of the exploited
working class alone.  Thus the aristocracy took their
revenge by singing lampoons on their new master, and
whispering in his ears sinister prophecies of coming
catastrophe.

In this way arose Feudal Socialism: half lamentation,
half lampoon; half echo of the past, half menace of the
future; at times, by its bitter, witty and incisive
criticism, striking the bourgeoisie to the very heart's
core; but always ludicrous in its effect, through total
incapacity to comprehend the march of modern history.

The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them,
waved the proletarian alms-bag in front for a banner.
But the people, so often as it joined them, saw on
their hindquarters the old feudal coats of arms, and
deserted with loud and irreverent laughter.

One section of the French Legitimists and "Young
England" exhibited this spectacle.

In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was
different to that of the bourgeoisie, the feudalists
forget that they exploited under circumstances and
conditions that were quite different, and that are now
antiquated.  In showing that, under their rule, the
modern proletariat never existed, they forget that the
modern bourgeoisie is the necessary offspring of their
own form of society.

For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary
character of their criticism that their chief
accusation against the bourgeoisie amounts to this,
that under the bourgeois regime a class is being
developed, which is destined to cut up root and branch
the old order of society.

What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much
that it creates a proletariat, as that it creates a
revolutionary proletariat.

In political practice, therefore, they join in all
coercive measures against the working class; and in
ordinary life, despite their high falutin phrases, they
stoop to pick up the golden apples dropped from the
tree of industry, and to barter truth, love, and honour
for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar, and potato
spirits.

As the parson has ever gone band in hand with the
landlord, so has Clerical Socialism with Feudal
Socialism.

Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a
Socialist tinge.  Has not Christianity declaimed
against private property, against marriage, against the
State?  Has it not preached in the place of these,
charity and poverty, celibacy and mortification of the
flesh, monastic life and Mother Church?  Christian
Socialism is but the holy, water with which the priest
consecrates the heart-burnings of the aristocrat.


B. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism

The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that has
ruined by the bourgeoisie, not the only class whose
conditions of existence pined and perished in the
atmosphere of modern bourgeois society.  The mediaeval
burgesses and the small peasant proprietors were the
precursors of the modern bourgeoisie.  In those
countries which are but little developed, industrially
and commercially, these two classes still vegetate side
by side with the rising bourgeoisie.

In countries where modern civilisation has become fully
developed, a new class of petty bourgeois has been
formed, fluctuating between proletariat and bourgeoisie
and ever renewing itself as a supplementary part of
bourgeois society.  The individual members of this
class, however, are being constantly hurled down into
the proletariat by the action of competition, and, as
modern industry develops, they even see the moment
approaching when they will completely disappear as an
independent section of modern society, to be replaced,
in manufactures, agriculture and commerce, by
overlookers, bailiffs and shopmen.

In countries like France, where the peasants constitute
far more than half of the population, it was natural
that writers who sided with the proletariat against the
bourgeoisie, should use, in their criticism of the
bourgeois regime, the standard of the peasant and petty
bourgeois, and from the standpoint of these
intermediate classes should take up the cudgels for the
working class.  Thus arose petty-bourgeois Socialism.
Sismondi was the head of this school, not only in
France but also in England.

This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness
the contradictions in the conditions of modern
production.  It laid bare the hypocritical apologies of
economists.  It proved, incontrovertibly, the
disastrous effects of machinery and division of labour;
the concentration of capital and land in a few hands;
overproduction and crises; it pointed out the
inevitable ruin of the petty bourgeois and peasant, the
misery of the proletariat, the anarchy in production,
the crying inequalities in the distribution of wealth,
the industrial war of extermination between nations,
the dissolution of old moral bonds, of the old family
relations, of the old nationalities.

In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism
aspires either to restoring the old means of production
and of exchange, and with them the old property
relations, and the old society, or to cramping the
modern means of production and of exchange, within the
framework of the old property relations that have been,
and were bound to be, exploded by those means.  In
either case, it is both reactionary and Utopian.

Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture,
patriarchal relations in agriculture.

Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had
dispersed all intoxicating effects of self-deception,
this form of Socialism ended in a miserable fit of the
blues.


C. German, or "True," Socialism

The Socialist and Communist literature of France, a
literature that originated under the pressure of a
bourgeoisie in power, and that was the expression of
the struggle against this power, was introduced into
Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that
country, had just begun its contest with feudal
absolutism.

German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux
esprits, eagerly seized on this literature, only
forgetting, that when these writings immigrated from
France into Germany, French social conditions had not
immigrated along with them.  In contact with German
social conditions, this French literature lost all its
immediate practical significance, and assumed a purely
literary aspect.  Thus, to the German philosophers of
the eighteenth century, the demands of the first French
Revolution were nothing more than the demands of
"Practical Reason" in general, and the utterance of the
will of the revolutionary French bourgeoisie signified
in their eyes the law of pure Will, of Will as it was
bound to be, of true human Will generally.

The world of the German literate consisted solely in
bringing the new French ideas into harmony with their
ancient philosophical conscience, or rather, in
annexing the French ideas without deserting their own
philosophic point of view.

This annexation took place in the same way in which a
foreign language is appropriated, namely, by
translation.

It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of
Catholic Saints over the manuscripts on which the
classical works of ancient heathendom had been written.
The German literate reversed this process with the
profane French literature.  They wrote their
philosophical nonsense beneath the French original.
For instance, beneath the French criticism of the
economic functions of money, they wrote "Alienation of
Humanity," and beneath the French criticism of the
bourgeois State they wrote "dethronement of the
Category of the General," and so forth.

The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the
back of the French historical criticisms they dubbed
"Philosophy of Action," "True Socialism," "German
Science of Socialism," "Philosophical Foundation of
Socialism," and so on.

The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus
completely emasculated.  And, since it ceased in the
hands of the German to express the struggle of one
class with the other, he felt conscious of having
overcome "French one-sidedness" and of representing,
not true requirements, but the requirements of truth;
not the interests of the proletariat, but the interests
of Human Nature, of Man in general, who belongs to no
class, has no reality, who exists only in the misty
realm of philosophical fantasy.

This German Socialism, which took its schoolboy task so
seriously and solemnly, and extolled its poor
stock-in-trade in such mountebank fashion, meanwhile
gradually lost its pedantic innocence.

The fight of the German, and especially, of the
Prussian bourgeoisie, against feudal aristocracy and
absolute monarchy, in other words, the liberal
movement, became more earnest.

By this, the long wished-for opportunity was offered to
"True" Socialism of confronting the political movement
with the Socialist demands, of hurling the traditional
anathemas against liberalism, against representative
government, against bourgeois competition, bourgeois
freedom of the press, bourgeois legislation, bourgeois
liberty and equality, and of preaching to the masses
that they had nothing to gain, and everything to lose,
by this bourgeois movement.  German Socialism forgot,
in the nick of time, that the French criticism, whose
silly echo it was, presupposed the existence of modern
bourgeois society, with its corresponding economic
conditions of existence, and the political constitution
adapted thereto, the very things whose attainment was
the object of the pending struggle in Germany.

To the absolute governments, with their following of
parsons, professors, country squires and officials, it
served as a welcome scarecrow against the threatening
bourgeoisie.

It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills of
floggings and bullets with which these same
governments, just at that time, dosed the German
working-class risings.

While this "True" Socialism thus served the governments
as a weapon for fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at
the same time, directly represented a reactionary
interest, the interest of the German Philistines.  In
Germany the petty-bourgeois class, a relic of the
sixteenth century, and since then constantly cropping
up again under various forms, is the real social basis
of the existing state of things.

To preserve this class is to preserve the existing
state of things in Germany.  The industrial and
political supremacy of the bourgeoisie threatens it
with certain destruction; on the one hand, from the
concentration of capital; on the other, from the rise
of a revolutionary proletariat.  "True" Socialism
appeared to kill these two birds with one stone.  It
spread like an epidemic.

The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with
flowers of rhetoric, steeped in the dew of sickly
sentiment, this transcendental robe in which the German
Socialists wrapped their sorry "eternal truths," all
skin and bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale
of their goods amongst such a public.

And on its part, German Socialism recognised, more and
more, its own calling as the bombastic representative
of the petty- bourgeois Philistine.

It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation,
and the German petty Philistine to be the typical man.
To every villainous meanness of this model man it gave
a hidden, higher, Socialistic interpretation, the exact
contrary of its real character.  It went to the extreme
length of directly opposing the "brutally destructive"
tendency of Communism, and of proclaiming its supreme
and impartial contempt of all class struggles.  With
very few exceptions, all the so-called Socialist and
Communist publications that now (1847) circulate in
Germany belong to the domain of this foul and
enervating literature.


2. CONSERVATIVE, OR BOURGEOIS, SOCIALISM

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing
social grievances, in order to secure the continued
existence of bourgeois society.

To this section belong economists, philanthropists,
humanitarians, improvers of the condition of the
working class, organisers of charity, members of
societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals,
temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of every
imaginable kind.  This form of Socialism has, moreover,
been worked out into complete systems.

We may site Proudhon's Philosophie de la Misere as an
example of this form.

The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of
modern social conditions without the struggles and
dangers necessarily resulting therefrom.  They desire
the existing state of society minus its revolutionary
and disintegrating elements.  They wish for a
bourgeoisie without a proletariat.  The bourgeoisie
naturally conceives the world in which it is supreme to
be the best; and bourgeois Socialism develops this
comfortable conception into various more or less
complete systems.  In requiring the proletariat to
carry out such a system, and thereby to march
straightway into the social New Jerusalem, it but
requires in reality, that the proletariat should remain
within the bounds of existing society, but should cast
away all its hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

A second and more practical, but less systematic, form
of this Socialism sought to depreciate every
revolutionary movement in the eyes of the working
class, by showing that no mere political reform, but
only a change in the material conditions of existence,
in economic relations, could be of any advantage to
them.  By changes in the material conditions of
existence, this form of Socialism, however, by no means
understands abolition of the bourgeois relations of
production, an abolition that can be effected only by a
revolution, but administrative reforms, based on the
continued existence of these relations; reforms,
therefore, that in no respect affect the

relations between capital and labour, but, at the best,
lessen the cost, and simplify the administrative work,
of bourgeois government.

Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression, when,
and only when, it becomes a mere figure of speech.

Free trade: for the benefit of the working class.
Protective duties: for the benefit of the working
class.  Prison Reform: for the benefit of the working
class.  This is the last word and the only seriously
meant word of bourgeois Socialism.

It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a
bourgeois -- for the benefit of the working class.


3.  CRITICAL-UTOPIAN SOCIALISM AND COMMUNISM

We do not here refer to that literature which, in every
great modern revolution, has always given voice to the
demands of the proletariat, such as the writings of
Babeuf and others.

The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain
its own ends, made in times of universal excitement,
when feudal society was being overthrown, these
attempts necessarily failed, owing to the then
undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to the
absence of the economic conditions for its
emancipation, conditions that had yet to be produced,
and could be produced by the impending bourgeois epoch
alone.  The revolutionary literature that accompanied
these first movements of the proletariat had
necessarily a reactionary character.  It inculcated
universal asceticism and social levelling in its
crudest form.

The Socialist and Communist systems properly so called,
those of Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen and others, spring
into existence in the early undeveloped period,
described above, of the struggle between proletariat
and bourgeoisie (see Section 1. Bourgeois and
Proletarians).

The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class
antagonisms, as well as the action of the decomposing
elements, in the prevailing form of society.  But the
proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them the
spectacle of a class without any historical initiative
or any independent political movement.

Since the development of class antagonism keeps even
pace with the development of industry, the economic
situation, as they find it, does not as yet offer to
them the material conditions for the emancipation of
the proletariat.  They therefore search after a new
social science, after new social laws, that are to
create these conditions.

Historical action is to yield to their personal
inventive action, historically created conditions of
emancipation to fantastic ones, and the gradual,
spontaneous class-organisation of the proletariat to
the organisation of society specially contrived by
these inventors.  Future history resolves itself, in
their eyes, into the propaganda and the practical
carrying out of their social plans.

In the formation of their plans they are conscious of
caring chiefly for the interests of the working class,
as being the most suffering class.  Only from the point
of view of being the most suffering class does the
proletariat exist for them.

The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as
their own surroundings, causes Socialists of this kind
to consider themselves far superior to all class
antagonisms.  They want to improve the condition of
every member of society, even that of the most
favoured.  Hence, they habitually appeal to society at
large, without distinction of class; nay, by
preference, to the ruling class.  For how can people,
when once they understand their system, fail to see in
it the best possible plan of the best possible state of
society?

Hence, they reject all political, and especially all
revolutionary, action; they wish to attain their ends
by peaceful means, and endeavour, by small experiments,
necessarily doomed to failure, and by the force of
example, to pave the way for the new social Gospel.

Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a
time when the proletariat is still in a very
undeveloped state and has but a fantastic conception of
its own position correspond with the first instinctive
yearnings of that class for a general reconstruction of
society.

But these Socialist and Communist publications contain
also a critical element.  They attack every principle
of existing society.  Hence they are full of the most
valuable materials for the enlightenment of the working
class.  The practical measures proposed in them --
-such as the abolition of the distinction between town
and country, of the family, of the carrying on of
industries for the account of private individuals, and
of the wage system, the proclamation of social harmony,
the conversion of the functions of the State into a
mere superintendence of production, all these
proposals, point solely to the disappearance of class
antagonisms which were, at that time, only just
cropping up, and which, in these publications, are
recognised in their earliest, indistinct and undefined
forms only.  These proposals, therefore, are of a
purely Utopian character.

The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and
Communism bears an inverse relation to historical
development.  In proportion as the modern class
struggle develops and takes definite shape, this
fantastic standing apart from the contest, these
fantastic attacks on it, lose all practical value and
all theoretical justification.  Therefore, although the
originators of these systems were, in many respects,
revolutionary, their disciples have, in every case,
formed mere reactionary sects.  They hold fast by the
original views of their masters, in opposition to the
progressive historical development of the proletariat.
They, therefore, endeavour, and that consistently, to
deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class
antagonisms.  They still dream of experimental
realisation of their social Utopias, of founding
isolated "phalansteres," of establishing "Home
Colonies," of setting up a "Little Icaria" -- duodecimo
editions of the New Jerusalem -- and to realise all
these castles in the air, they are compelled to appeal
to the feelings and purses of the bourgeois.  By
degrees they sink into the category of the reactionary
conservative Socialists depicted above, differing from
these only by more systematic pedantry, and by their
fanatical and superstitious belief in the miraculous
effects of their social science.

They, therefore, violently oppose all political action
on the part of the working class; such action,
according to them, can only result from blind unbelief
in the new Gospel.

The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France,
respectively, oppose the Chartists and the Reformistes.



IV.  POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS IN RELATION TO THE
VARIOUS EXISTING OPPOSITION PARTIES

Section II has made clear the relations of the
Communists to the existing working-class parties, such
as the Chartists in England and the Agrarian Reformers
in America.

The Communists fight for the attainment of the
immediate aims, for the enforcement of the momentary
interests of the working class; but in the movement of
the present, they also represent and take care of the
future of that movement.  In France the Communists ally
themselves with the Social-Democrats, against the
conservative and radical bourgeoisie, reserving,
however, the right to take up a critical position in
regard to phrases and illusions traditionally handed
down from the great Revolution.

In Switzerland they support the Radicals, without
losing sight of the fact that this party consists of
antagonistic elements, partly of Democratic Socialists,
in the French sense, partly of radical bourgeois.

In Poland they support the party that insists on an
agrarian revolution as the prime condition for national
emancipation, that party which fomented the
insurrection of Cracow in 1846.

In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it
acts in a revolutionary way, against the absolute
monarchy, the feudal squirearchy, and the petty
bourgeoisie.

But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil
into the working class the clearest possible
recognition of the hostile antagonism between
bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the German
workers may straightaway use, as so many weapons
against the bourgeoisie, the social and political
conditions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily
introduce along with its supremacy, and in order that,
after the fall of the reactionary classes in Germany,
the fight against the bourgeoisie itself may
immediately begin.

The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany,
because that country is on the eve of a bourgeois
revolution that is bound to be carried out under more
advanced conditions of European civilisation, and with
a much more developed proletariat, than that of England
was in the seventeenth, and of France in the eighteenth
century, and because the bourgeois revolution in
Germany will be but the prelude to an immediately
following proletarian revolution.

In short, the Communists everywhere support every
revolutionary movement against the existing social and
political order of things.

In all these movements they bring to the front, as the
leading question in each, the property question, no
matter what its degree of development at the time.

Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and
agreement of the democratic parties of all countries.

The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims.
They openly declare that their ends can be attained
only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social
conditions.  Let the ruling classes tremble at a
Communistic revolution.  The proletarians have nothing
to lose but their chains.  They have a world to win.


WORKING MEN OF ALL COUNTRIES, UNITE!